Evolutionary Biology is the study of history of life forms on earth. What exactly is evolution? To understand the changes in flora and fauna that have occurred over millions of years on earth, we must have an understanding of the context of origin of life, i.e., evolution of earth, of stars and indeed of the universe itself. What follows is the longest of all the construed and conjectured stories. This is the story of origin of life and evolution of life forms or biodiversity on planet earth in the context of evolution of earth and against
the background of evolution of universe itself.

When we look at stars on a clear night sky we are, in a way,  looking back in time. Stellar distances are measured in light years. What we see today is an object whose emitted light started its journey millions of year back and from trillions of kilometres away and reaching our eyes now. However,  when  we  see  objects  in  our  immediate surroundings we see them instantly and hence in the present time. Therefore, when we see stars we apparently are peeping into the past.

The origin of life is considered a unique event in the history of universe. The universe is vast. Relatively speaking the  earth  itself  is  almost  only  a  speck.  The  universe  is  very old – almost 20 billion years old. Huge clusters of galaxies comprise the universe. Galaxies contain stars and clouds of gas and dust. Considering the size of universe, earth is indeed a speck. The Big Bang theory attempts
to explain to us the origin of universe. It talks of a singular huge explosion unimaginable in physical terms. The universe expanded and hence, the temperature came down. Hydrogen and Helium formed sometime later. The gases condensed under gravitation and formed the galaxies of the present day universe. In the solar system of the milky way galaxy, earth was supposed to have been formed about 4.5 billion years back. There was no atmosphere on early earth. Water vapour, methane, carbondioxide and ammonia released from molten mass covered the surface. The UV rays from the sun brokeup water into Hydrogen and Oxygen and the lighter H2 escaped. Oxygen combined with ammonia and methane to form water, CO2 and others. The ozone layer was formed. As it cooled, the water vapor fell as rain, to fill all the depressions and form oceans. Life appeared 500 million years after the formation of earth, i.e., almost four billion years back.

Evidence that evolution of life forms has indeed taken place on earth has come  from  many  quarters.  Fossils  are  remains  of  hard  parts of life-forms found in rocks. Rocks form sediments and a cross-section of earth's crust indicates the arrangement of sediments one over the other during the long history of earth. Different-aged rock sediments contain fossils of different life-forms who probably died during the formation of the  particular  sediment.  Some  of  them  appear  similar  to  modern
organisms. They represent extinct organisms (e.g., Dinosaurs). A study of fossils in different sedimentary layers indicates the geological period in which they existed.  The study showed that life-forms varied over time and certain life forms are restricted to certain geological time-spans. Hence, new forms of life have arisen at different times in the history of earth.  All this is called paleontological evidence. 
Do you remember how the ages of the fossils are calculated? Do you recollect the method of  radioactive-dating  and  the  principles  behind  the  procedure?

Comparative  anatomy  and  morphology  shows  similarities  and differences among organisms of today and those that existed years ago.
Such similarities can be interpreted to understand whether common ancestors were shared or not. For example whales, bats, Cheetah and
human (all mammals) share similarities in the pattern of bones of forelimbs.  Though these forelimbs perform different functions in these animals,  they  have  similar  anatomical  structure  –  all  of  them  have humerus,  radius,  ulna,  carpals,  metacarpals  and  phalanges  in  their forelimbs. Hence, in these animals, the same structure developed along different directions due to adaptations to different needs.  This is divergent evolution and these structures are homologous.  Homology indicates common ancestry.  Other examples are vertebrate hearts or brains. In plants  also,  the  thorn  and  tendrils of Bougainvillea and Cucurbita represent  homology.  Homology  is  based  on  divergent evolution whereas analogy refers to a situation exactly opposite. Wings of butterfly  and  of  birds  look  alike.  They  are  not  anatomically  similar structures though they perform similar functions.  Hence, analogous structures are a result of convergent evolution - different structures evolving for the same function  and  hence  having  similarity.

Other examples of analogy are the eye of the  octopus  and  of  mammals  or  the flippers of Penguins and Dolphins. One can say that it is the similar habitat that has  resulted  in  selection  of  similar adaptive features in different groups of organisms but toward the same function: Sweet  potato  (root  modification)  and potato  (stem  modification)  is  another example for analogy.
